fix(guides): news + guide for docker talos (#35604)
truecharts/charts: website/src/content/docs/news/2025-05-28-talos-docker.md.md

---
slug: "news/docker-compose-talos"
title: "Truenas-Oriented Talos Docker-Compose"
authors: [alfi0812, privatepuffin]
date: 2025-05-28
tags:
  - "2025"
---

## TrueNAS Switches to Incus with Fangtooth Release — VM Support Now Experimental

> With the release of TrueNAS SCALE Fangtooth, iXsystems has officially switched its virtualization backend from LXC/LXD to Incus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the release of TrueNAS SCALE Fangtooth, iXsystems has officially switched its virtualization backend from KVM to Incus.
```

> This transition has introduced several limitations, and VM support is now labeled as experimental.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This transition has introduced several limitations, and VM support is now also labeled as experimental. Leaving users without a stable VM-solution on TrueNAS.
```

Users have reported performance issues with the new Incus-based VM system,

> and some previously supported configurations—such as running Talos OS with Qemu-Guest-Agents — are no longer functional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and some previously supported configurations—such as running VMs with raw-file backed disks (making use of ZFS small-blocks special-vdevs) — are no longer functional.
```

> Currently, there are no official Talos options available for Incus, making it difficult for users to control the VM threw TrueNAS UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, there are no official Talos options available for Incus, making it difficult for users to control the VM threw TrueNAS UI.
```

WTF? No? this is about LXC/LXD, completely wrong spot

Author: > WTF? No? this is about LXC/LXD, completely wrong spot

Incus has its own guest-agent which is not available on talos

Author: And qemu no longer works

Reviewer: ahh yeah be clear thats about guest agent then indeed

> In light of this, TrueCharts has reaffirmed its commitment to the TrueNAS community by releasing a new guide

Reviewer: This is just weird, we dont speak of ourselves in third party.
